This episode is brought to
you by Datadog a cloud
scale monitoring platform built by
engineers for engineers, Datadog, unifies
metrics, logs, traces, and APM
features in a single intuitive
interface. Allowing your engineers to
quickly troubleshoot issues and collaborate
across departments and time zones.
Plus machine learning based alerts
auto-detect application performance, anomalies, and
forecast future performance. To begin
monitoring your environment. Start a
free trial of Datadog by
visiting bitly.com/data dog shirt, and
receive a complimentary t-shirt that's
bitly.com/datadog shirt. Hi, this is
Scott Hanselman, Hansel minutes. And
today I'm talking with dr.
Anna Howard. I spoke to you
in episode 467, and we're
getting towards 700 now that
was like forever ago. It
was forever goes 2015, so
four years ago. And we
talked a little bit about
some of the work you'd
done at NASA and JPL
and the Mars rovers. And
I think you were just
getting started with XY robotics
at the time. Is that
correct? Yeah. So let's see.
2015, the company had been
in existence for two years,
but we had just started
to release our first set
of products in 2015. So
that was still a who's
the market who's going to
actually purchase these things. First
customer kind of things. And
you know, at first customer
is also the first customer.
Blue's trying to figure out
the service and things like
that. And if you have
to pivot or exactly, do
you have to pivot, is
it really addressing the need?
What's the pricing and all
of those good things, and
you are the CTO at
XY robotics. But then when
I, when I say, well,
wait a second, are you
still teaching? How many jobs
do you have? I actually
have three jobs. So I'm
a CTO. Ads are robotics.
I'm also a professor at
Georgia tech. So I teach,
I have students and also
I run a school of
interactive computing. So I'm a
chair. So I have an
administrative hat as well with,
I don't know, I'm thinking
with staff and faculty over
50 employees. So yeah. Do
you have some hours in
the day that I do
not have? I don't know.
Cause I still exercise. I
still teach Zumba. I have
kids that I go to
as well showing off. Yeah,
that's fantastic. Yeah. And you've
been, and then here's the
thing though. You've been doing
this for, with all due
respect for a long time.
You were at NASA starting
in 1993. You worked at
a, I mean the jet
propulsion laboratory. This has been
a amazing career where you've
been pivoting and doing multiple
things at once. Yeah. And
I think it's because I
go to things that I
find exciting and interesting, and
then it allows me to
really be passionate about it,
which means that I can
do, like, even though I'm
saying I have three, three
and a half jobs, like
I don't actually feel like
it because I enjoy doing
it. And it's just, I
make it part of my
life and it's not something
that's separate like, Oh, I
gotta go to work. Oh,
I gotta do this. It's
like a, Oh, let's think
of new ideas what's going
on. And when I get
bored, I do switch. Hmm.
That's a really good point.
I mean, ultimately if it
was three jobs where it's
like, Oh, I got to
wake up this morning and
do this whole thing. Right.
I'm going to go to
make robots and make kids
happy and successful. Yeah. No,
it's, it's actually enjoyable. And
then you get that internal
motivation too, when you see
like with kids like them
learning and their, their eyes
lighting up and you're like,
okay, yeah. This is like
really satisfied. Now how's everything
been robots for you? Cause
I know that you're the
chair of the multidisciplinary robotics
PhD program at Georgia tech.
And a lot of things
keep coming back to robots,
but you, you do have
experience in other areas. You
do, although I'm no longer
chair of the PhD program.
Cause that would have been
like another five or six
jobs. So I actually, I,
yeah, it's been a lot.
So in four years I
was the PhD for the
robotics. And then I transitioned
to be the associate director
for research for robotics Institute.
And then I transitioned to
associate chair for faculty development
and now chair for school
of interactive computing, but kind
of the theme is been
engineering, computer science. My research
has been robotics. It's now
strongly in the AI space,
but still the embodiment with
robotics embodied AI. Are you
trying to find the intersection
of where AI begins and
like, are you trying to
build them bodies so that
they can come and defeat
us all? No, not defeat
us all, help us all
improve our quality of life.
So one of the things
about like robotics in the
past was that the AI
wasn't advanced enough. I mean,
you know, AI was search
and like search and robotics.
It just didn't meld. But
now like the things that
are going on in the
AI world made sense for
robotics. And so that's why,
you know, interacting with people
and adapting to them and
learning about their preferences. Like
that's part of AI emotion
recognition. That's part of AI
now it's part of robotics.
Yeah. Interesting. So when, when
I think about AI, I
think about, you know, human
computer interactions and I've had
a number of people on
the show talking about, you
know, suggestions in an action
that a robot can take.
Do robots also use AI
and how they decide to
move? Or are their movements
still procedurally written? Well, no.
So their, their movements themselves
might be procedural algorithms, but
which movement should they select?
Is this intelligence, right? So
for example, if I recognize
that I'm a child that
I'm interacting with is happy,
right? So what is my
corresponding responsible is to be,
it's probably supposed to be
happy or encouraging cause they
did something good. Right? And
so that learning process is
becomes, okay, what's the happy
behavior versus a sad behavior
versus a frustrated behavior. And
so when I get at
a happy, it may be
like I have five ways
to express happiness. And so
I have to think about,
well, what's the most optimal
way to express happiness. Ah,
okay. Is there any concern
about applying AI to movement?
For example, I could say
have an AI decide whether
or not to go over
to the child, which would
be the decision point. Well
then the movement would be
procedural or I could say
to the robot, you have
these ways to move, figure
it out. And the robot
could like, we see robots
that have learning to walk
where we didn't actually teach
the robot how to move
its legs. It just trial
and error until it finally
figured it out. Is there
any concerns about applying AI
to the physicality of a
robot? No. So some of
the concerns also feed into
the AI space. So this
aspect of safety or user
safety, right? We worry about
that with, with AI systems
that are running things. We
worry about that with robotic
systems, like how do you
have a robot safely figure
out something? And the problem
is, is that there's now
an actuation, right? So if
I teach a robot, I
want the robot to learn
how to drive, right? The
robot may learn how to
drive on sidewalks. Like that's
something we probably don't want
to do. And so thinking
about the rules that you
have to put into the
system so that it can
learn freely, but it also
has some bounded constraints. I
see. Interesting. Cause I, I'm
not sure if we talked
about this four years ago,
but I'm currently on an
open source artificial pancreas system.
So I have a DIY
closed loop, insulin pump and
sensor system. So this is
a system by which my
blood sugar is read off
of a sensor. It's interpreted
the decision is made for
me much like a self
driving car except for diabetics.
And then the actuation in
this case would be the
delivery of insulin through the
insulin pump and that's ongoing
and, and, and, and happening.
But they're also pretty significant
constraints. Even if the system
were to fly wildly out
of control, I have to
think about what's the worst
possible thing that could happen.
That would affect my, my
health in an, in a
negative way. Right. And so
you think about thresholds for
example. Yeah. That's exactly what
we do. Yeah. Alright. That's
good to know that we're
thinking the right things, because
this is a community of
DIY kind of enthusiasts that
have, that are putting systems
like this together in the
open source space. Yeah. So
I think that's really the
thing is making sure that
there are still constraints. And
are you thinking about this
more so than now that
you are developing a technology
for kids and little kids?
So robotics is doing a
lot of work in the
K you know, kindergarten one
to second grade type. Yeah.
So three to seven, three
to eight. I do think
about it quite often. And
mainly it's also because when
you're working with kids, they
don't necessarily have a baseline
of like what's right. Or
what's wrong yet. Like as
an adults, when we see
an AI system, you know,
doing something wrong, we kind
of get it, but it's
doing something that's incorrect, but
because kids don't necessarily have
a baseline, they may learn
incorrect things. And so it
is very important at that
space and in that environment
to ensure that there are
constraints and that, you know,
the robot has to be,
or the AI system has
to be, you know, pretty
much a hundred percent correct.
And if not, you know,
basically being able to send
a signal back to the
teacher or the parent or
the clinician that, you know,
well, Hey, this is what
the desk guests are. This
is what the norm is,
but there's also some, you
know, One of the things
that you've worked on since
I saw you last was
this idea of Zoomo Z
U M O, and you
can check it out@zumolearning.com. Is
this a robot eye? It
looks like a big plush
turtle. That's quite large. Yes.
It is a plush turtle.
Although we have had people
call it a soft robot,
which is quite interesting. And
so we go with it,
but it's, it's actually, it's
not a, a robot in
terms of the actuation, what
it is is it has
the sensing in it and
it has the intelligence. And
so what it does is
it takes a user's inputs,
which are presses and, and
bangs on the surface of
the push turtle. And it
converts it to signals with
respect to an app for
control of an app. And
so you can have kids
learn things like sequences, you
know, one, two, three, four,
five in the correct order
that matches to an app.
And so it'll take that
and provided as a sensor
input to the different educational
and therapy apps that we
have. It's fascinating to me,
when I look at the
videos of the kids playing
with, Zoomo, how they just
seem completely nonplussed at this,
of course, I've got this
robot and it's, you know,
I've got this plush turtle
and it's talking to the
screen, it's all wireless. There's
all these things that we
take for granted. I mean,
the most exciting thing that
I did growing up in
the late seventies and the
early eighties was a attach
a Sharpie to a turtle
and draw, you know, on
a piece of butcher paper.
And I thought that was
the greatest thing ever, that
took an entire weekend to
figure out. And now we've
got a wireless plus turtle
robot with AI know it's
it's. And I think that's,
what's so magical about it
is that it feels natural.
Like kids play with stuffed
animals all the time. And
they're curious. And so even
when we see how a
kid interacts at the very
beginning with the push turtle,
they like press something and
something happens on the screen.
They very quickly realize that
it's a controller right. Very
quickly. And it is one
thing that engages them because
like our apps, for example,
our math apps now it's,
it's a game. It's not
like, Oh, I'm learning math.
It's like, Oh no, I'm
playing. And you know, we're
in the back of it.
Like, yeah, but you're learning
that, but that's okay. You're
learning coding, but that's okay
because you're having fun doing
it. It's a stealth maneuver.
You snuck STEM into there,
the plush, the plushy that
they were already carrying around
with them. Exactly. And what's
nice is that it really
is about assessability. And so
with the design of Zemo,
as well as the apps,
it addresses children who have,
might have motor disabilities. Cause
the plush is basically a
switch. And so if you
just have a light touch,
it will convert that it
also allows you to focus.
So you can, a parent
can isolate it so that
nothing works except for the
center button. Right. So that
allows a student to actually
focus like, okay, we want
you to start focusing. You
have too much going on.
It's hard for you to
focus. Okay. This allows you
to not focus. I see.
So it can be as
simple or as complex. It
can grow with the child.
Cause it looks like from
the back, I'm guessing it's
got like, you know, up,
down left, right. And then
the center button, it has
a cross on its back
and that can be made
as complicated or as simple.
I see some kids that
are very young, just simply
squeezing it and that's enough
for their game, but someone
else could use it as
a game controller. Correct. So
the whole gamut. And so
it's adaptable as based on
that. And we just say
based on the child's ability,
whatever their ability is, the
system can be used. How
far do you want to
take something like this? Do
you want to go kind
of all Teddy Ruxpin and
have it talking and thinking
and adding features. Yeah. We
would love that. So one
would be having it doesn't
have a sound module, for
example, can yeah. Version. Well,
so it's version one, but
they have some version, two
components. For example, there is
some bi-directional communication. We just
don't take advantage of it,
right? Because of the, so
the intelligence is there. We
just don't have the outputs,
like a speaker in the
system, but it can talk
back and forth. Debugging is
an essential skill use to
maintain a high standard of
code yet. No one really
teaches you how to effectively
do bug. So it ends
up taking a lot of
time. And that's where Oz
code comes in. Oscoda code
is a visual studio extension
for C sharp developers that
gives you debugging superpowers with
a powerful heads up display,
advanced search inside objects, link
query to bugging side-by-side object
comparisons and Oz code leads
you to the root cause
in half the time with
low to no frustration, go
to Oz code that's
dash code.com/magic to check out
their magical features. You can
download the free 14 day
trial and try it out
for yourself. That's  hyphen
code.com/magic. What made you go
from something as, as powerful,
as an impressive, as thinking
about robots on Mars and
working with, with, with NASA
and JPL to making a,
a plush turtle. I mean,
I think that they are
both very important, but one
could look at them as
being a pretty dramatic move.
Did you feel like you
kind of like kicked butt
out there in, in the
world and now is ready
to bring that knowledge to
the show? No. So it
was it's, it's, it's a
strange path. So when I
was at NASA, just, you
know, thinking about how do
you make future Rover missions
and how do you make
them more intelligent? When I
came to Georgia tech, when
I first came, I was
still doing science, different robotics.
We were sending rovers robotics
to glaciers, right. Both on
the glacier, on top, as
well as under the water.
So I was still doing
those things. But then what
happened was, you know, after
like one of the last
studies with like the aquanauts
and deploying underwater, I lost
that, like that passion, right.
It was like engineering and
it was like, cool. Cause
people said it was cool,
but it wasn't that like,
I wake up in the
middle of the night, I'm
like, Oh my gosh, I
figured it out. I wasn't
doing that anymore. And so
I had to figure out
what I wanted to do.
How do I reboot? Because
when things get a little
boring, you start filling those
hours. And ever since, even
with NASA days, I'd always
done outreach. I'd always done
education. I'd always done camps,
STEM, camps, robotics, STEM, camps,
like that had been kind
of something I've always done.
And one year at Georgia
tech, I had a camp.
So typical camp, I just
do this. And I had
a young lady who had
a visual impairment and the
stuff wasn't assessable. Like it
was clearly not assessable. And
I thought she was bright
and inquisitive. And we basically,
I had a student sit
next to her and just
kind of go through things.
And I, as I sat
there, I was thinking, you
know, this is a shame,
like, how is it that
we, as scientists are basically
cutting off the world for
some, an individual when they
clearly could do it, but
we've made the world inaccessible.
And so I started doing
that, but it was more
of a hobby, right. It
was like, I had like
undergrads working on this. It
still wasn't the main research.
But what happened was I
started getting more involved in
that and saying, well, Hey,
now we can bring in
robotics, like hardcore robotics as
well as education. Oh. I'm
like, I can do therapy
and work with clinicians. And
so just started becoming much
more interesting. And so the
switch that a lot of
people see, isn't like a
drastic switch. It was that
if you think about the
train tracks, like I was
doing both and at some
point it just crossed. Hmm.
It's funny how that sneaks
up on us. Sometimes then
you wake up one day
and you go, wow, I'm
more interested in this than
I was in that. Right.
If it's, it's amazing. Cause
you still do both. You
just don't realize that once
it becomes more of a
priority, it is fascinating. So
robotics is making a bunch
of products now, not just
Zuma learning, but there's also
STEM stories and STEM dash
are making apps also apps
to teach kids. Yes. And
I'm actually excited about that
in literacy apps as well.
So the coding came from
thinking about assessable STEM and
what are the components of
STEM? So of course there's
the math, which was fairly
straight forward. And then there
was the coding, which was
becoming more. And I see
it even now as just
becoming so much more of
a mainstay and States are
starting to require it for
graduation and me interacting with
kids, especially children with diverse
learning needs. I was like,
you know, these systems have
no clue. You can't just
say, Oh, all of our
12th graders are going to
suddenly have to learn how
to code. What about those
individuals who don't have access?
What about individuals who have
special needs? And so that's
how coding came was like,
okay, I can teach a
four year old now how
to code whatever their abilities.
And, and when you think
about coding, it's like, you
know, how do you think
through sequences and putting words
together, a code together to
solve a problem and that
concept. So we designed a
full curriculum. That again, starting
from actually three, all the
way to eight, we have
three coding apps that get
them more and more advanced
through that, but as fun
and as engaging and it
works with Zoomo. So it
was pretty, pretty cool. So
rather than accepting that coding
should be done like this,
and people should learn how
to code like this. You
are like, you're, you're saying
a three year old can
learn the procedural things needed
the systems thinking required to
be a coder, even at
that age, even almost before
they can read. Yes. You
know? And, and one of
the things is I, kids
are natural scientists and engineers
it's us as society that
kind of drums it out
of them. But if you
ever see a child, I
mean, they're curious, they're picking
up things, they're blinking styles.
They're right. They're exploring their
world and looking at cause
and effects and things like
that. And so when they're
in that mode of how
does the world work because
I'm growing and I'm in
it. I mean, that's the
perfect time to say, Oh,
by the way, the world
also works in terms of
coding. And this is how
you think about putting things
together and sequencing. When you
want to explore how to
break your mom's ex, well,
these are the steps to
do it. You know, I
was thinking this in the
context of what I learned,
which was my, you know,
logo, the little, we thought
it was a turtle. It
turns out it was actually
just a triangle. I remember
it very distinctly as being
this amazing turtle in this
high resolution screen, but it
turns out it was just
black and white and it
was this little triangle. But
the new, the new way
of thinking is something like
you've got Tommy, the robot.
This is like a little,
a little, little, I don't
know how to describing. He's
a little cube with little
cube feet. And he walks
around on a mat and,
but you have to move
him with code. You have
to teach him how to
write. You have to move
him with code. And he
has friends. So the app,
he has friends that you
have to help in terms
of coding. And so, you
know, there's cat and dog
and Al and you got
to get Tommy to go
around the map and find
castle cats. Good. And then,
you know, cat and turtle.
Well, where's the dog dog
still wants to be a
friend too. And so, yeah.
And kids love things that
move, right? These all have
curriculum. So if you're a
teacher or, you know, a
teacher, this isn't just a
thing that for, for someone
who has some means to
go and spend money and
buy a robot for their
one kid, this has been
in a classroom setting, right.
It's meant to be in
a classroom setting. All the
curriculum is online. It's quote
unquote, open source. I use
like in files that you
can easily download and change
based on, you know, if
you want to make it
a one day or if
a semester long curriculum. Hmm.
So you're doing all of
this on both iOS and
Android. So some of these
things are apps. You can
download Tommy. The robot has
a robot that comes with
him. The Zoomo learning system
with the, the plush turtle
or the soft robot. Does
that include a tablet or
do you use your own
tablet? You use your own
tablet. So back in, when
we first started selling Zumo
we included a tablet. And
what we found was that
everyone just threw the tablet
away because they had like
a lot of times, like
the school system had already
got in the tablets, like
the brand new, you know,
iPads. Right. I see. So
you had an Android tablet,
you were including, and now
there's just no need. Cause
like nobody used it. It
was like, okay, well let's
like get rid of that
and lower the price. Like
that makes perfect sense. Oh,
I see. That's wish I
was. That's funny that you
mentioned that. Cause I noticed
that the price, basically it
was cut in half and
I was trying to figure
out what the story was
there. The story was I'll
use the tablet that I've
already got. Yes. Interesting. Now
you had talked about your
interest in working with kids
that have different learning abilities
and that might be a
mental limitation or a physical
limitation. And there's also, you're
having an interest in accessible
switches. People who have motor
limitations to still be able
to play with a tablet,
even though they might not
be able to touch the
screen. Correct. Because I think
when you have the abilities
that we should, as scientists
and engineers, we should basically
ensure that we provide access
to what's out there. And
you know, the world is
becoming this, this world. I
would say touch based world,
right? Like even the OEMs
that used to have key.
Like you have to go
and you have to touch
the screen. And so I
worry that as we continue,
if we don't think about
this consciously, that we're going
to be in trouble, especially
since we now know that
older adults, as they age
also have limitations in fine
motor control. So we need
to design on both ends
the ends of the spectrum.
Great point. And I've noticed
that your, your apps don't
require really precise touches. You've
put this, not just with
physical things like this button
that you can add to
your tablet, but also the
apps themselves don't require real
fine motor control because these
are for kids. Correct? So
no, no tiny buttons, no
swiping across no nothing that
requires you to physically like
to make the movement also
a cognitive based movement. We're
not doing that. You see
things like this going in
the future right now. You
said that the turtle is,
has the potential for, for
back and forth communication. Do
you think that that plushes,
that are smart, have the
potential to be as big
as something like an iPad?
I think for a certain
target demographic. I know for
one thing you can, if
you think about even the
more gaming industry, right? Like
with all the things that
are out there, Xbox, and
so what happens if you
can convert that into an
educational tool, which really isn't
right as a gaming tool,
but if you can convert
that to an educational tool,
make your games educational and
then add in things like
plushes and things that's exciting,
just like, and people would
just be like, Oh, this
is like kind of a
nice controller for this game
machine. I think you can
start really making education a
priority. Yeah. I was really
impressed with the, the accessible
X-Box controller came out recently.
I mean, that's, that's got
a lot of potential as
well. And I wonder if
that could be expanded or
extended with something like your,
your, your things. I mean,
it has an open API,
basically anything with a one
eighth inch headphone Jack can
be plugged into it. There's
a whole ecosystem around buttons
and things that can plug
into Xbox controllers. I wonder
if they could be used
on something that wasn't an
Xbox, I don't know. Well,
I think it's pretty close.
In fact, there, the construction
of the, the basically assessable
Xbox controller that they released.
Yeah. Which is awesome. Functionally
it's it's housing will works.
So if you open up
Zumo, there's actually all of
these 3.5 millimeter jacks that
go into our controller. Yes.
Great minds think alike. Yes,
Of course. I would never
open my friend up or
certainly not within the group.
Yeah. That would be kind
of, you'd have to like,
yeah, that wouldn't be kind
of nice. Not in front
of someone. Right? You have
to be an a behind
closed door. No one peeking
in. Absolutely. So Zumo has
apps on iTunes and Google
plays. What works with both
Android and an iOS. Are
you making new apps all
the time or what's next
for Xero? We are. So
our current set of apps
are an enhancement to our
STEM stories. So one of
the things that we had
discovered, so our STEM stories
combine literacy. So because again,
we're working with kids who
are also learning how to
read early readers and our
STEM stories. We're putting in
STEM concepts. So you can
read about like Tommy, the
turtle, who's a turtle, walks
you through coding through this
interactive storytelling mood. What we
had was teachers were asking,
well, can we, can I
get some feedback? And I
use it to also provide
some input to the student.
So we have this whole
call readable stories. That's based
on STEM stories that as
it reads to you, you
be to it, it provides
you information on how to
correct your reading. So it's
literally a reading tutor in
the home. I see. So
you're reading the story on
your iPad. I can see
that the, you can download
STEM some of the STEM
stories for free, and then
on the screen, you can
decide what Zumo does and
how he interacts basically key
bindings for the, for the
techies amongst us. And you
adjust Zumos key bindings and
interact with him as you
read the, I read the
books, but it also verbally
gives you input. The tablet
talks, the tablet talks. Okay.
So there's a narrator. There
was a narrator in avatar.
Yes. Oh, okay. And you
said that they are switch
accessible eBooks where that switch
might be Zoomo the turtle,
or it might be one
of your other switches. It
can be not just our
switches. So we really wanted
to ensure, like, when I
think about accessibility and access,
it also means this community.
And so any of the
switches that are out there
and available that currently work
with iPad or Android will
work with our apps. Okay.
It's pretty slick. And it's
also worth pointing out that
the app has no in
app purchases is no advertising.
I know that we download
a lot of iPad apps
that are filled with ads
and things that we don't
necessarily want blasted into our
kids' brains. There's a ton
of apps that you've got,
I'm looking at, what is
it like 20 plus apps?
That's our robotics has in
the, in at least in
the iTunes full of STEM
Stories, correct? Without advertising with
none, no advertising. So there's
no fear of like something
coming in through the back
door. And it also means
that, so one of the
things we've noticed with some
of the quote unquote free
apps, cause they're not free,
but when a kid is
working with it is actually
is distracting from the educational
content, right. Which is not
helping their learning. Like as
you're doing something, you need
to be immersed in this
experience. And if it's that,
Oh, in order to go
to the next stage, there's
this ad, you've just broke
that connection for learning. Right.
When you've taught that you've
taught the child about these
idle tappers, where you're teaching
them how to be advertised
to, which has been a
big problem for my kids,
11 and 13, they are
willing to tolerate this ad
and they'll sit there and
passively watch it beam into
their brains, which is frankly,
it's gotten me looking for
apps that don't have that
kind of nonsense. Yeah. I
know. So folks can check
out Zoomo the turtle@zumolearning.com and
STEM stories, his stories with
a Z at the end,
I'm going to make sure
that I include links to
all of this in the
show notes. It's been really
nice catching up with you.
It's been a while and
maybe a whole check in
with you in a couple
of years and see how
things are going. I don't
know. Let's not make it
four though. That's absolutely true.
Hopefully I'll see you sooner
than later. Yes. That would
be lovely. We've been talking
with dr. Hannah Howard from siren
robotics. This has been another
episode of handsome. We'll see
you again next week. .